[[!meta title="Roadmap planning session"]]

From [[last time|2016/01/30/using-glade-to-build-curie-gui]], we were going to
look at the MuPDF API for the last remaining task. However, we should step back
and take a look at where we are going before moving forward and why we are
doing each thing.

First, we will look at UI functionality then move on to background processing
that is necessary to support each of those.

## UI

- Display

  
- Navigation



## Further reading

### Books

These two books discuss and compare how people use books both on paper
and on screens. There are many ideas in them both.

- Reading and Writing the Electronic Book
  Catherine C. Marshall
  2010

- Designing Usable Electronic Text, 2nd Edition
  Andrew Dillon
  2004

### Review articles

- Electronic Environments for Reading: An Annotated Bibliography of Pertinent Hardware and Software (2011)
  Corina Koolen, Ray Siemens, Alex Garnett
  2011

  <http://src-online.ca/index.php/src/article/view/71>

### Research articles

- Hinckley, K., Bi, X., Pahud, M., Buxton, B., Informal Information
  Gathering Techniques for Active Reading. 4pp Note. In Proc. CHI 2012
  Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Austin, TX, May 5-10, 2012.

  See the video at <https://kenhinckley.wordpress.com/2012/05/08/paper-informal-information-gathering-techniques-for-active-reading/> for a demo.

- Refurbishing the Camelot of Scholarship: How to Improve the Digital Contribution of the PDF Research Article
  John Willinsky, Alex Garnett, and Angela Pan Wong
  2012
  <http://quod.lib.umich.edu/j/jep/3336451.0015.102?view=text;rgn=main>

  This one comes with a demo PDF <https://pkp.sfu.ca/files/idealizedPDF.pdf>
  that demonstrates various aspects of what they would like to achieve
  which they compare with the article that they modified
  <http://www.italiavacance.eu/index.php/IJAR/article/download/95/102>.
  
  As you can see, the authors opt to change the way PDFs are published, but
  clearly, we can't convince everyone to do that. So instead, we will need
  to be able to reformat documents our own way.
  
  That will be the main contribution of Project Renard that nobody has
  done yet. I want to call it document resynthesis. I got the
  "resynthesis" name from a sound synthesis technique that takes existing
  sounds and takes the Fourier components and processes them in order to
  make new sounds.
  
