[[!meta title="Modularising and splitting Curie"]]
[[!meta author="zaki"]]
[[!meta description="How Curie was split up into multiple repositories and how
all of these repositories were tested using CI tools before being released."]]
[[!meta date="2017-09-20 22:49:08-0400"]]


[[!toc levels=2]]

In order to make it easier to modify parts of Curie independently and make it
possible to combine the codebase with other modules in new ways, it was
necessary to split Curie into separate modules.

For example, if we want to create a new Gtk3-based application, then pulling in
a module which contains helper functions for setting up Gtk3 could be shared
amongst all Gtk3-based applications instead of copying the code into each new
application.

## Renaming the quick-and-dirty way

The first step towards refactoring is renaming the modules that make up Curie.
Since all of the code is placed under the `Renard::Curie` namespace, a new
namespace must be created and all the non-Curie specific modules need to be
placed under that. This new namespace is `Renard::Incunabula` and the name
changes are specified in the following subsection.

### Package renaming by final repository

#### project-renard/p5-Renard-Incunabula

The [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula]] repository is for common code that all tools
can use. In particular, it contains the common development setup (such as
[[`Function::Parameters`|https://p3rl.org/Function::Parameters]], error types,
and data types) and generic document/page models.

|  Original  | Renamed |
|------------|---------|
| `Renard::Curie::Setup` | `Renard::Incunabula::Common::Setup` |
| `Renard::Curie::Types` | `Renard::Incunabula::Common::Types` |
| `Renard::Curie::Error` | `Renard::Incunabula::Common::Error` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Outline` | `Renard::Incunabula::Outline` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::Role::FromFile` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document::Role::FromFile` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::Role::Pageable` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document::Role::Pageable` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::Role::Cacheable` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document::Role::Cacheable` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::Role::Renderable` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document::Role::Renderable` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::Role::Boundable` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document::Role::Boundable` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::Role::Outlineable` | `Renard::Incunabula::Document::Role::Outlineable` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::Role::CairoRenderableFromPNG` | `Renard::Incunabula::Page::Role::CairoRenderableFromPNG` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::Role::Bounds` | `Renard::Incunabula::Page::Role::Bounds` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::Role::BoundsFromCairoImageSurface` | `Renard::Incunabula::Page::Role::BoundsFromCairoImageSurface` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::Role::CairoRenderable` | `Renard::Incunabula::Page::Role::CairoRenderable` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::CairoImageSurface` | `Renard::Incunabula::Page::CairoImageSurface` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::RenderedFromPNG` | `Renard::Incunabula::Page::RenderedFromPNG` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::CairoImageSurface` | `Renard::Incunabula::Format::Cairo::ImageSurface::Document` |

#### project-renard/p5-Renard-Incunabula-MuPDF-mutool

The [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula-MuPDF-mutool]] repository wraps the `mutool` command line
program from MuPDF in order to retrieve page bounding box information and
to render document pages as PNG images.

|  Original  | Renamed |
|------------|---------|
| `Renard::Curie::Data::PDF` | `Renard::Incunabula::MuPDF::mutool` |

#### project-renard/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Format-PDF

The [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Format-PDF]] repository contains models for
working with PDF files. It currently uses [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula-MuPDF-mutool]]
as the backend, but there are plans to use other backends.

|  Original  | Renamed |
|------------|---------|
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Document::PDF` | `Renard::Incunabula::Format::PDF::Document` |
| `Renard::Curie::Model::Page::PDF` | `Renard::Incunabula::Format::PDF::Page` |

#### project-renard/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Frontend-Gtk3

The [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Frontend-Gtk3]] repository contains helper
functions (e.g., shims for older versions of the `gtk+3` library) and roles
(e.g., loading components from Glade GUI builder XML files) for Gtk3.

|  Original  | Renamed |
|------------|---------|
| `Renard::Curie::Helper` | `Renard::Incunabula::Frontend::Gtk3::Helper` |
| `Renard::Curie::Component::Role::FromBuilder` | `Renard::Incunabula::Frontend::Gtk3::Component::Role::FromBuilder` |
| `Renard::Curie::Component::Role::UIFileFromPackageName` | `Renard::Incunabula::Frontend::Gtk3::Component::Role::UIFileFromPackageName` |


### Creating the new repositories

In order to create new repositories for these files, it is necessary to first
make sure that we only keep the commits in the history that touch those files.
The first step is to create clones of the original [[repo/curie]] repo for each
of the new repositories. To do so, `.nfo` files are created that contain the
information from the above renaming tables. In
`project-renard/rename/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Format-PDF.nfo`, this looks like

    s,Renard::Curie::Model::Document::PDF,Renard::Incunabula::Format::PDF::Document,
    s,Renard::Curie::Model::Page::PDF,Renard::Incunabula::Format::PDF::Page,

Each original package name is listed in a `sed(1)` style substitution using
commas as the delimiters (as opposed to the traditional forward-slash since
this conflicts with file paths).


We then run the following script for each repo in the form `./repo-process.sh
p5-Renard-Incunabula-Format-PDF`.

In `project-renard/rename/repo-process.sh`:

    #!/bin/sh
    
    REPO="$1";
    [ -z "$REPO" ] && echo "no repo" && exit 1
    
    cd ~/sw_projects/project-renard/$REPO/$REPO
    PATHS_TO_KEEP=`~/sw_projects/project-renard/rename/files-to-keep.sh ~/sw_projects/project-renard/rename/$REPO.nfo | tr '\n' ' '`
    if [ "$REPO" = "p5-Renard-Incunabula" ]; then
        PATHS_TO_KEEP="$PATHS_TO_KEEP t/lib/CurieTestHelper.pm"
    fi
    echo $PATHS_TO_KEEP
    BRANCH_TO_EXTRACT_FROM='master'
    
    git filter-branch -f --index-filter \
        "git rm --ignore-unmatch --cached -qr -- . && git reset -q \$GIT_COMMIT -- $PATHS_TO_KEEP" \
        --prune-empty -- $BRANCH_TO_EXTRACT_FROM

In `project-renard/rename/files-to-keep.sh`:

    #!/bin/sh
    
    FILE_OF_REPLACEMENTS="$1"
    grep -o 's,[^,]*,' $FILE_OF_REPLACEMENTS \
        | grep -o 'Renard[^,]*' \
        | sed -e 's,::,/,g' \
        | sed 's,\(.*\),lib/\1.pm t/\1.t,' \
        | sed 's/ /\n/' | sort -u \
        | xargs -I{} bash -c '[ -f "{}" ] && ls {}' \
        | xargs -n1 git log --name-only --format=format: --follow -- \
        | sort -u | grep -v '^$'

What this does is keep all the git history for the files that are under the
`lib/` and `t/` directories that refer to that package. So for the line

    s,Renard::Curie::Model::Document::PDF,Renard::Incunabula::Format::PDF::Document,

it would keep the files `lib/Renard/Curie/Model/Document/PDF.pm` and
`t/Renard/Curie/Model/Document/PDF.t` and any of the commits that contained
those files or their previous names (by using `git log --follow`).

### Renaming the packages

The previous step only moves the files into the new repositories, but does not
rename their contents. The following script changes the contents of
each repository by calling `./do-replacements.sh`.

In `project-renard/rename/do-replacements.sh`:

    #!/bin/sh
    
    DIR_INFO="$HOME/sw_projects/project-renard/rename"
    REPO_DIRS=`ls $DIR_INFO/*.nfo | xargs -n1 basename | sed 's/.nfo$//'`
    SED_LIBS=`cat $DIR_INFO/*.nfo | awk '{ print length, $0 }'| sort -nr | cut -d' ' -f2 | tr '\n' ';'`
    SED_FILES=`echo $SED_LIBS | sed -e 's,::,/,g'`
    
    #echo $SED_LIBS
    #echo $SED_FILES
    
    
    for repo in $REPO_DIRS curie; do
        REPO_DIR="$HOME/sw_projects/project-renard/$repo/$repo"
        REPO_FILES=`find $REPO_DIR/lib $REPO_DIR/t -type f`;
        perl -pi -e "$SED_LIBS" $REPO_FILES
        rename -n "$SED_FILES" $REPO_FILES \
            | sed -e 's,rename(,smv ,' -e 's,)$,,' -e 's/,//' \
            | sh
    done
    
    for repo in $REPO_DIRS; do
        REPO_DIR="$HOME/sw_projects/project-renard/$repo/$repo"
        cd $REPO_DIR
        git add .
        git tag -d $(git tag -l)
    done

What this does is take all of the `.nfo` files that contain those
substitutions and applies those substitutions in each repository (i.e., the new
repositories and curie). Not only does it apply those substitutions to the
contents of the files, but also to the full paths using the `rename(1p)`
command. So the previously mentioned files are renamed as follows:

|  Original  | Renamed |
|------------|---------|
| `lib/Renard/Curie/Model/Document/PDF.pm` | `lib/Renard/Incunabula/Format/PDF/Document.pm` |
| `t/Renard/Curie/Model/Document/PDF.t` | `t/Renard/Incunabula/Format/PDF/Document.t` |


In addition, for all the new repositories (i.e., not curie), the tags are deleted
since the older release versions do not apply.

Finally, the package in `t/lib/CurieTestHelper.pm` has been turned into the
library package `Renard::Incunabula::Devel::TestHelper` in
[[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula]].  This allows it to be shared by the testing code
in all the repositories.

## Tracking dependencies and other developer maintenance 

Since each of the new repositories are starting off without any of the
developer maintenance setup that [[repo/curie]] has (such as the list of native
dependencies and CI configuration), it is necessary to make sure that they
start off with a basic skeleton. This is contained in the [[`skeleton`|https://github.com/project-renard/devops/tree/master/skeleton]]
directory of [[repo/devops]].

In particular, the following files are special because they are used to specify
dependencies:

### cpanfile-git

The `maint/cpanfile-git` file contains the repository Git URLs and branch
name for any of the other Project Renard dependencies that are needed to
run the code in the current repository. Having this allows for testing
changes in those dependencies by just switching to another branch name. For
example, the [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Frontend-Gtk3]] `cpanfile-git` file
contains

<code>
<pre>
    requires 'Renard::Incunabula',
        git => 'https://github.com/project-renard/p5-Renard-Incunabula.git',
        branch => 'master';
</pre>
</code>

which means that when building under a CI environment, the
`Renard-Incunabula` distribution will be installed from the Git repository
before it is pulled from CPAN. In fact, this approach allowed the tests to
run under the CI environment before all of the dependencies were uploaded to
CPAN as long as the following environment variable was set

<code>
<pre>
    - export PERL_CPANM_OPT="--skip-satisfied"
</pre>
</code>

so that `cpanm` would not exit if the required module was installed but it
could not find the required modules on CPAN.

In addition to installing the code from source in the CI environment, the
Git repository provides a commit SHA that can be used to decide whether to
reinstall from source or keep the version that was previously installed at
that SHA. This allows for shorter CI runs because modules that take a while
to build such as [[repo/p5-Alien-MuPDF]] do not need to be rebuilt.

### devops.yml

The `maint/devops.yml` file specifies the native dependencies that are
needed to run the code in the current repository. For
example, the [[repo/p5-Renard-Incunabula-Frontend-Gtk3]] `devops.yml` file
contains

<code>
<pre>
    ---
    native:
      debian:
        packages:
          - pkg-config
          - libgirepository1.0-dev
          - gobject-introspection
          - libgtk-3-dev
      macos-homebrew:
        packages:
          - gtk+3
          - gtk-mac-integration
          - gnome-icon-theme
      msys2-mingw64:
        packages:
          - mingw-w64-x86_64-perl
          - mingw-w64-x86_64-gobject-introspection
          - mingw-w64-x86_64-cairo
          - mingw-w64-x86_64-gtk3
</pre>
</code>

which specifies all the `gtk+3` packages needed by that repository. This is
used to install each module from source so it is not necessary to repeat the
native dependencies of each of the repositories specified in `cpanfile-git`
since the `devops.yml` files of those repositories will specify what they need.

# Conclusion

Moving the code into separate repositories has not yet been used to create new
applications, but it has made library code more modular and opened the way for
more flexible approaches such as the ability to incorporate multiple rendering
backends for a given file type such as PDF.

While the refactoring code is not the cleanest approach, it does cover all the
needs for this job. It may need to be revisited later to make a more
general-purpose tool.

