[[!meta title="About"]]

## What does Renard mean?

Renard is the French word for fox. This project is named after two ideas.

The first of these is the medieval character [[Reynard|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reynard]]
who stars as the anti-hero of a series of tales featuring anthropomorphic
animals that represent various classes of medieval society. Some of the stories of Reynard
were meant to be a political satire: Reynard would use his cunning to deceive
the upper class and some how survive against all odds. Despite all his
trickery and vices, he was still depicted as a loveable rogue that would use
his brain to win against brawn of the aristocracy.

The second is is based on the essay *[[The Hedgehog and the Fox|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hedgehog_and_the_Fox]]* by Isaiah Berlin.
The essay discusses two ways of thinking named after characters from a fable:
the way of the Hedgehog which focuses on one big idea and the way of the Fox
which focuses on many ideas at once. He uses this to compare various thinkers that
worked in one way or the other. Then, more interestingly, he describes Tolstoy
as "a fox by nature, but a hedgehog by conviction" showing that these two ideas
can exist simultaneously.

In some ways, the two ideas are connected. Some argue that in the past, it was
possible to be a Hedgehog and thrive by looking through one lens, but the world
has become more complex and interconnected. To be a Fox is to be able to be
more eclectic in how you look at ideas. However, being to able to integrate all
these together requires the wit and intellectual flexibility of Reynard.

Project Renard is meant to help you embrace this flexibility by
by providing tools to be more skillful at handling knowledge.

## Images

The Project Renard logo is a picture of the Reynard character
which is taken from a Book of Hours from circa 1460. The cropped image is taken
from [[this Wikimedia page|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Fuchs.margin_(MMW10F50_f6r)_detail.jpg]] and
the original full page is at [[this Wikimedia page|https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fuchs.margin.jpg]].

[[!img img/project-renard-logo.png alt="Picture of a fox (Renard) reading a book"]]

The header image is taken from the border of an [[illuminated manuscript|https://www.bl.uk/catalogues/illuminatedmanuscripts/ILLUMIN.ASP?Size=mid&IllID=826]] at the British Library.

[[!img img/illuminated-page-header.png alt="Picture of an illuminated manuscript border" size="300x"]]
